Prion diseases are a group of transmissible, untreatable, and often fatal brain diseases which occur in mammals. These diseases are the result of a transition in the naturally occurring prion protein into an abnormal, misfolded state, leading to the formation structured aggregates within the brain and ultimately, irreversible neurodegeneration. This aggregation is often underway for years before symptoms become present. Although these diseases are incredibly rare (as few as 300 estimated cases in the United States per year), their aggressive nature and unique pathological manifestation have made them a topic of interest both throughout popular culture and within the scientific community.

The mechanisms and causes of misfolding in prions are still largely unknown. Without these insights, development of therapeutics is essentially impossible. Current research on prions has focused on various areas, including protein structure, biochemistry, and pathogenesis, as well as comparisons to other protein misfolding diseases such as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and ALS. This project will focus primarily on characterizing biochemical and structural dynamics within prions by analyzing the crystal structure of the human prion protein (PDB ID: 1QLX) and gathering insights on allosteric pathways within the protein structure. In the context of protein dynamics, allosteric pathways refer to networks of molecular interactions within a protein structure that allow signals (e.g. conformational changes) to propagate from one region of the protein to another. By identifying coupled residues and/or structural domains, the project aims to highlight regions which may play a critical role in the misfolding process. To achieve this objective, the project lays out the following specific aims:

Specific Aim 1: To perform normal mode analysis (NMA) on the human prion protein using the Anisotropic Network Model (ANM). By performing NMA on the PDB structure, I will be able to gather valuable insights on the flexibility and mobility of different regions. The ANM provides important directional information about the modes of motion, making it a good model by which to perform NMA, especially in the study of allosteric pathways.
Specific Aim 2: To identify and visualize allosteric residues and communication pathways within the protein structure. Using ProDy’s built in analysis tools such as the cross-correlation matrix, I will be able to compute residue-residue coupling patterns, with strong correlations indicating ‘pathways’ of dynamic communication within the structure. This analysis will allow me to identify and visualize clusters of residues that may act as hubs for allosteric communication.
Specific Aim 3: To compare differences in allosteric communication pathways across prion protein states. The final component of this project aims to extend the analyses from Aims 1 and 2 to a misfolded state of the human prion protein (PDB ID: 2KUN). This analysis will allow me to examine how certain allosteric pathways are altered or disrupted during the transition to the misfolded state.
